Welcome everyone to creating
Ruby on Rails Applications for
Safari on iPhone and the Desktop.
My name's Luke Burton.
Are you all excited to be in
the Ruby on Rails session?
Yes!
Developers, developers, developers!
Yes, I know.
So, you know,
you'll have to forgive me because,
first of all, I'm Australian,
so you're probably not going to
understand a lot of what I'm saying,
but if you don't understand something,
just look around.
There's probably an Australian sitting
next to you who can do the translation.
There's a lot of us here.
Another reason I'm not really feeling
myself is normally during WWDC,
I would see a lot of the sessions
through the bottom of a pint glass,
which is, I'm sure, how some of you guys
have seen the sessions,
but I'm very tired at the
moment because on Monday,
my wife gave birth to a little baby girl.
Thank you.
This is being recorded,
so in the year 2020,
I'm going to bring up this
session and embarrass her
mightily at one of her birthdays.
And I haven't had much sleep,
so forgive me if I start
going off the rails.
Yes.
All right, so let's go on to our agenda.
What are we going to talk
about in this session?
We're going to, first of all,
have a look at a little bit
of a fairy tale on Rails.
Then we're going to move on to a
discussion of inside Ruby on Rails,
talk about the technology
in a little bit more detail.
Then we're going to get our
feet wet with actually coding a
real Ruby on Rails application.
Then we're going to learn about how we
can ask some sophisticated questions
about data using Ruby on Rails.
After that,
we'll learn how to present the answers
that we got from asking those questions.
And then we'll talk about
how Rails faces the world.
Deployment.
So are you in the right session?
Well, there's no such thing as
a wrong session at WWDC,
but you might take more out of
this session than others if you've
never heard of Ruby on Rails,
or if you've only dabbled with
Rails but you haven't really dived in
and done a lot with the technology,
or perhaps you're a Rails developer
that's new to Mac OS X.
If you're a more advanced developer,
we hope you'll take something
out of this session as well,
and we've got some great
Q&A lined up at the end,
so you can ask some very hairy
questions then and get all your
answers hopefully satisfied.
So let's talk about our
fairy tale on Rails.
Now, Apple has a lot of money.
We've got $19 billion in the bank.
It's probably like $22 billion now,
based on the number of MacBook Airs
I've seen in the audience.
So...
We need to sort of keep
track of all this money,
and Joel and I, my co-presenter,
who I'll introduce shortly,
were approached to sort
of write a really simple,
small website that was going to help
keep track of a very important area where
some of this money is spent at Apple.
And we had to develop it quickly.
It had to be accessible
on Safari on the Desktop,
and it had to be
accessible on the iPhone.
And it was going to be a very, you know,
basically a business-critical,
mission-critical financial
application for Apple.
We were rewarded very handsomely
out of that pool of $19 billion.
Both Joel and I received $10
gift vouchers to Cafe Max.
And I sort of skimped and got
the $4 salad and pocketed the
$6 to spend on other things.
We had a choice of languages that we
could develop this application in,
naturally.
We don't have to develop
it in Ruby on Rails,
but, you know, Perl?
We're old-time Perl developers.
We're not necessarily
ragging on Perl here,
but we're smart guys as well,
if I don't mind saying so.
And every time we end up writing Perl,
we end up writing code
that looks like this,
and we end up getting sort of knocks on
our door years later from disgruntled
people who have to maintain our code.
And just as an aside,
does anyone know what this code does?
That's right.
Wait, what was that?
Something with a regular expression.
Well, yeah,
it's got little slashes in it.
Nice one.
It's got a while loop in there as well.
It apparently prints out prime numbers.
So, yes,
of course it prints our prime numbers.
We could have used PHP as well, but,
you know, it is very much everything
in the kitchen sink language,
grown very organically over time,
and when a need comes up in PHP,
they sort of put another function in,
and are you looking for a haystack and
a needle or a needle in a haystack?
Can I remember this function?
We've got something like 3,500 functions
that are in the public namespace,
and it makes it easy to write
an application quickly but
hard to maintain it later on.
Much in the same way as Perl does.
J2EE, that's a heavyweight language.
There's a lot of, you know,
lifting there, or heavyweight framework,
I should say.
It's good for some things,
but in our case, you know,
we had this mission-critical
financial thing we had to sort out,
and we didn't have time to go
through J2EE and skill ourselves up
and go on a long development cycle.
It wasn't really
appropriate for our project.
I didn't really hear that.
Something to do with C#.
It's like one of those-- it's got
something to do with developers,
developers, developers, actually,
that particular language.
Yeah, we're not talking about C# today.
Anyway,
so we can talk about our secret project,
though, that we're involved in.
And for that,
I'd like to switch to the demo machine.
The demo machine.
Apple has $19 billion in the bank,
and a small but significant proportion of
it is spent on playing World of Warcraft.
And we can't have our guildmaster
in the dark about what's going
on in the World of Warcraft bank.
So we sat down,
we selected Ruby on Rails,
and we developed this kind of like online
banking application for World of Warcraft
as an example of what you can do.
And first thing I'll point out is
we will have sample code available
for this whole application.
So we're not going to drill through
everything piece by piece here,
but we can give you the sample
code for this and you'll see it
and be able to have a look at it.
Everything on this page is
CSS apart from the images.
So all those gradients and drop shadows
and reflections and all this other stuff
we've implemented in CSS using WebKit.
We can go across to our gold history
page here and find out what's
been going on in our guild bank.
Have people been depositing,
withdrawing things?
We see here somebody made a very sizable
contribution sometime along in March.
So we can actually click and drag
there and get it all populated below.
And we can actually scroll
down and see that 2000 gold was
deposited by a player called Null.
And that's his real name, Null,
because we've, you know,
it's all about punning on
Apple related things in iGuild.
Now if I go across to the
inventory history tab,
I can see the items that have been
going in and out of our guild bank.
And you'll notice that when we have
a very large selection of items
here that we're looking through,
when you page down quickly,
it's pulling in pages of data as
it needs to rather than having
them all loaded in to start with.
So this is a very efficient way
of getting the data in our nice
JavaScript graphing library here.
We've got individual player reports.
So our guild master who's very concerned
about how each character is doing
can go in and find out about Boris,
the level 31 Tauren Druid,
find out what he has been or she has been
withdrawing and depositing into our bank.
We've also got a little player
rankings page so we can see aggregate
information about the whole bank,
which is pretty cool with lots of
little graphs in there as well.
One of the cool things is we wrote
an iPhone version for it as well.
So this is what it looks
like on the iPhone and,
you know, this was my first iPhone
application and it took me,
you know, a couple of days to
get my head around it.
But once my head got around it,
it was very easy to develop with.
So I can go across into
the gold history here,
see the same graph that I saw before.
Something new you can do in the
iPhone 2.0 software that you
couldn't do in previous versions.
I can actually tap and drag along here
to select a region and have it populate.
Very nice.
class.
Click back.
Got a nice little transition.
Those are all done in CSS as well.
I can also see player reports,
same sort of thing.
All this is Ajaxified,
so there's no whole page
loads going on here.
Back.
We've got our other graph here as well.
A whole bunch of things.
So that is the little demo
application that we'll be taking
you through parts of today.
If we can switch back to the slides.
In the next section,
I'm going to hand it over to
my colleague Joel Young to talk
about inside Ruby on Rails.
Thanks, Luke.
Hi, my name is Joel Young.
I work on Mac OS X in the
integration department.
I'm going to be talking about
what is inside of Ruby on Rails.
You know, we saw,
you saw we came up with a nice
little demo application for you,
and we were able to build
this in a few short weeks,
and
So I'm going to talk about just
what makes Rails so productive.
So to answer this,
I'm going to address two questions here.
One is just what is Ruby on Rails,
and how is it structured to make your
development fast yet maintainable?
And why, in particular,
would you want to use it on Mac OS X?
So Rails promises to be web
development that doesn't hurt.
It achieves this by
using a few big ideas.
So I'm going to talk about
just two of these right now.
One is the Model-View-Controller pattern,
which helps you keep your display code
separate from your business logic.
and a little something called
domain-specific language,
which is a way to keep your code
short and still understandable.
So first, Model-View-Controller.
You might be familiar with this.
The idea here is that you don't
want to be making database
connections inside of your templates.
Similarly,
you don't want to be spitting out
HTML code from the bits of functions
that handle your business logic.
If you do this even for a
medium-sized application,
it's a recipe for disaster down the line.
So, Modiview Controller solves
this by having a view layer,
which contains everything
that the user is going to see,
separate from the model layer,
which contains the
structure of your data.
So, in between them,
you have the controller mediating things.
It receives the user input,
translates them over to requests
for data from the model,
and once it has that data,
it then updates the view.
So, how does Ruby on Rails handle this?
How does Ruby on Rails structure this?
So, let's look at Ruby on Rails.
and David Aron.
You have ActiveRecord.
That's the name Rails uses
for the model layer.
ActiveRecord is a thin
layer around the database.
Generally, you're going to have one table
in your database translates
to one ActiveRecord class.
So now, the ActionController is the
name of the controller layer.
So when you get a
request from the browser,
it goes through the web server.
The web server pushes
it through to Rails,
and Rails dispatches it to the
proper ActionController class.
So the controller will then
request the data from ActiveRecord.
So then we have Action View,
name of the view layer.
So once the controller has
the data from Active Record,
it'll push it through to the
correct template and Action View,
where it's composited,
sent back as a response to the browser.
Next big idea here is
domain-specific language.
So it's an optimized
vocabulary for talking about
some particular problem set.
You could think of this as jargon.
Except in a good way, right?
So the classic example of this is
making a complicated order at Starbucks.
I'm not a big coffee person myself,
but I gather that Grande 2-Pump Vanilla
Non-Fat Extra Hot Latte is about the
most efficient way that you could
express that specific drink of coffee.
So how does Ruby on Rails do this?
Here's a few examples real quickly.
So let's say you want to
find an author named George.
You would call simply
author.findByFirstName George.
In your model, let's say you want to
define a relationship to
another publications model.
So you might say that it
has many publications.
Or, let's say,
before you show any page on the site,
you want to authenticate users, unless,
of course,
they're on the login page already.
You would say, before filter,
authenticate, accept login.
Very clear,
very easy to understand just what
these lines of code are doing.
So Ruby on Rails was
developed using Mac OS X.
This is David Heinemeier Hansen,
the creator of Ruby on Rails,
and when he talks about his motivation
for building a framework that is
meant to increase programmer joy,
he says this.
For all the time I've been
building Ruby on Rails,
I've been using a Mac.
I wouldn't have probably built
it if I didn't enjoy my computer.
And you can see this reflected
in the Rails community.
It's very Mac heavy.
And Apple has recognized this by
bundling it into Mac OS X as of Leopard.
So that means that for development,
you have everything you need to
very quickly build your application.
You have the Ruby language,
which comes bundled on Mac OS X with a
large number of useful Ruby libraries.
You have the Ruby on
Rails framework itself.
Now, for development,
you don't need a heavyweight
database application.
And SQLite, which comes bundled as well,
is perfect for quickly
bringing up your applications.
And now we have, as Luke showed you,
the iPhone simulator.
which will allow you to make
sure that the iPhone version
of your website looks great.
Similarly, for deployment,
Mac OS X Server is a great platform
for deploying your Rails applications.
It comes with Ruby and
the Rails framework.
And since you're going to be receiving
many requests from different users
potentially at the same time,
you'll want a more
heavyweight database server,
and it comes with MySQL installed.
Then for managing the many
Rails applications that
you might have running,
the server admin tools give you a nice
GUI way to handle all these things.
So, for a little taste of what it's like
to actually build a Rails application,
I'm going to hand it back to Luke.
I'd just like to point out
that's the first time Joel's
ever done a public presentation,
and you wouldn't really know it,
would you?
He's good.
All right, can we please switch back?
Oh, no, no,
don't switch the demo machine.
Ignore what I just said.
All right,
so talking about how we exactly
designed this particular
Ruby on Rails application,
we started off with a data source,
in this case,
the World of Warcraft Armory site,
which you can go to to get
all sorts of information for
your World of Warcraft guild.
Unfortunately,
the data is structured in a
very tabular sort of format,
so if you want to find out
information about trends or
aggregate information or sort of do
those kind of more complex queries,
you're sort of a little bit out of luck,
which frustrated our guild
master no end with his iron rule
that he exerts over our guild.
Luckily, behind the scenes,
when you view the code,
it's actually pretty much all XML.
So the way they've structured the site
is they give you XML and a style sheet,
and there's an in-browser.
So what you can do to harvest the data
from this site is just pull it down,
and you've got all this lovely
XML that you can use to aggregate
things and repurpose this
website for other purposes.
Naturally, this means you've got to
import the data somehow.
So we had a simple
script-based process here.
We had the Blizzard Armory
making HTTP requests to it
using our import script,
then populating some simple
active record tables.
In this case, we partitioned things off
into an inventory log,
an item, and a player,
an inventory log being one
transaction in the guild bank,
so like a withdrawal or a deposit.
And items and players are
fairly self-explanatory.
And backing all that up,
we just chose a simple SQLite database.
Now, to get the XML data in,
a really cool thing you can use is
this great little gem called HBricot.
It's pronounced HBricot.
We actually had to ask around to
someone who had seen the creator,
WhyTheLuckyStiff,
to find out how this was pronounced.
And I don't know if that's wise.
I don't know if Y's name on his birth
certificate is WhyTheLuckyStiff,
but it would be pretty cool if it was.
And then we have the parsing joy.
So it allows you to parse XML using
XPath or CSS-style selectors,
so similar to jQuery,
if you've ever done any
JavaScript work with that.
and it's pretty cool because
it's bundled with Mac OS X,
so you don't need to go
hunting for this library.
It's already available
on your system right now.
TextMate.
We love TextMate.
Everyone in the
Rails community loves TextMate.
The only people who don't
love TextMate are people on
Windows because they can't use it.
It's available from Macromates.com.
And it's really an editor that's
grown up and around Rails,
I think.
It kind of comes from
the Emacs school of,
you know, provide plug-ins and flexible
architectures so that
third-party developers can add
absolutely whatever they want.
And that's, you know,
the Rails community has really
taken this editor to heart.
Flexible Plugin Architecture.
And it's exclusive to Mac OS X.
So if you want this joy,
this wonderful work of TextMate,
then you are going to have
to develop on our platform.
Next up, Rails.
Obviously, to develop a Rails app,
we need Rails.
We need version 2.1 in this case.
The demo code we can give you,
and I'm going to regret saying this,
but if you want the sample code,
then please feel free to write
down our email address at
the end of the presentation,
and we'd be happy to share
the sample code with you.
We didn't write that in Rails 2.1,
but the demo that I'm going to code
up here will be written in Rails 2.1.
So we'll talk a little bit about the
new features that are in Rails 2.1.
If you haven't got
Rails 2.1 on your system,
it's very easy.
You just need to sudo gem install rails,
and that's it.
You've now got Rails 2.1.
Now I'd like to switch
to the demo machine.
Hello, demo machine.
All right,
so what we're going to do is take a
very small part of this project and
sort of create it from scratch as we go.
So I'm going to take
the player information,
that is the list of people
who are in our guild,
and I'm going to build some
simple tables and write through
to a view and demonstrate how
we sort of display this data.
So to get going,
I'm just going to start a
simple Rails app called demo.
And you can see here,
if you haven't generated
Rails app before,
it does all this fantastic
code generation for you.
It gives you the skeletons
to work with without sort of,
you know, making it hard to work with.
So what we're going to do
is the very next thing,
going to our Rails application,
and I'm going to generate a model.
I'm going to call this
model Player Class.
So this is the class of the player.
You might be a mage or a warlock
or a warrior or something.
That's the first model that
I'm actually going to generate.
It's going to have one attribute,
which is a name,
and it's going to be of type string.
So if I just go, Shazam.
It will generate all the
necessary things I need.
In particular,
you'll notice the migration
down the bottom here,
which generates the schema
for our database table.
In Rails 2.1, this is a timestamp,
which is a big benefit if you're working
in an application with many developers,
because before it was an
incrementing sort of integer,
and if two people generated
a migration with the same
number and then tried to merge,
it was a pain,
whereas now it's a timestamp,
so you probably won't get
quite as bad conflicts,
which is pretty cool.
So now I'm going to
generate another model,
this time called Player,
and this is obviously the player itself.
So players have names,
which are of type string.
They have a level.
I still haven't got to level 70.
which I'm embarrassed about.
They have a race, which is also a string.
They have a gender,
which is also a string.
They also have a player class ID,
which is our key into
the player class table,
and that is an integer.
Did I spell all that correctly?
I think I did.
Now we've generated our second model,
which is the player.
We just need to run these migrations
to actually create our database.
So the way you do that
is just rake db migrate.
That'll go away.
This is a little MacBook Air, by the way.
So if it takes a little bit,
it's chugging along, doing its best,
I assure you.
So it has gone away and
created these tables for us.
One cool thing that you can
do in Rails 2.1 is there's
actually a db console.
So you can do script db console,
and it will drop you into
the SQLite prompt of whatever
Rails environment you're currently in.
And you can see the schema, for instance,
see what's actually being created there,
which is pretty cool.
Now, at this point,
I'm going to fire up TextMate.
Let me grab everything here.
Can you see that OK?
OK, maybe not.
On the left-hand side,
there's actually the demo app.
So what I'm going to do now is
drill into my model classes.
I'm going to start with the player class.
Now, this is all the skeleton code
that's been generated for you.
So if you come from other
generated code backgrounds,
you might be pleasantly surprised to
not see 400 lines of crazy code in here.
This is the generated code
that was actually put for you.
All the magic is in the background.
So for that particular player,
we're going to say this
belongs to a player class.
And when you're saying belongs to,
it's kind of establishing a
one-to-one sort of relationship here.
And you use belongs to when the class
that you're actually working with,
or the table that you're working with,
is the table that
contains the foreign key.
So player contains the player class ID.
Therefore, we're using belongs to here,
as opposed to has one, for instance.
I'm going to save that.
Player class, in this case,
I'm going to say it as many playas.
And I'm going to add an
additional thing here.
So whenever we query for multiple
players through the player class,
I'm going to specify an order,
which is of name.
I'm going to order everything by name.
Nice and easy.
So,
now that we've got our database set up,
we've got a simple model system set up,
what we need to do now is actually
write a script to import data.
So, I'm going to just touch a
little import script here,
import.rb.
And I'm going to, first of all,
I'll show you the XML that
we'll actually be importing.
So this is kind of cut down a little
bit from what's on the Blizzard website,
but it's this big glob of XML,
and it's essentially just a page
root element and then multiple
character elements underneath that,
and they contain the
attributes encoded as sort of,
you know, key values in there.
So we're going to work
with that particular class,
and it's pretty easy.
What I'm going to start
with is require hbricot.
Make sure that's in there.
Then we're going to start a document.
It's going to be a new
hbricot XML document.
And I'm going to open
that file of players,
which is located...
Just there.
So now we've got a hbrecord
document we can query.
The query we want to make,
we want to search across page,
across character.
For each of those characters,
we will do something.
And each character inside this
block will be referenced by C.
So we're just going to create
a player each time we encounter
one of these characters.
The naming is slightly
sort of different here.
We're calling them players.
Blizzard calls them characters.
It doesn't really matter.
So I'm going to start with a name.
And I'm going to specify
a name such as that.
So essentially, I'm starting a hash here,
creating each name, the name column that
belongs to my player.
And I'm just pulling out the
attribute name from the character
element that I'm iterating over.
And we're going to do four of those.
So the next one is going to be the race,
followed by the level.
followed by the gender.
Race, level, gender.
I don't need to worry about types.
Rails will recognise that, for instance,
the level is an integer and will
massage the type into an integer for me,
even though from an XML document,
naturally it's going
to look like a string.
And that last thing is I want to
associate it with the right player class.
Now, the player class is just a string,
like mage or whatever,
that's in the character element.
What I can do is use a bit of
Rails trickery here and say
associate to the player class,
find or create by name.
I love it.
Class.
So the class is going to be mage,
and if mage exists,
it will supply the ID for
mage and associate it.
If mage doesn't exist,
mage will exist after this happens.
Simple.
Now, to actually run this script in the
context of our Rails application,
what we use is the scriptrunner command.
So I'm going to use scriptrunner,
and I'm going to say import.rb.
and it's gonna horribly
blow up in my face.
No, it doesn't.
Fantastic.
Yes, woo!
This is basically,
I am poking the demo gods with a large
stick here by trying to do so much code,
but you know, somebody needs to do it.
Now I'm gonna drop into the console
and just verify that something
is actually in my database.
So let's find the first player.
And I believe this is new for Rails 2.1.
If I say player.first,
I should get the first player in there.
This makes me happy.
If I say player.class,
I can actually ask for
the last player class.
And that works out okay.
Last player class that
was loaded in was rogue.
Our association should work,
so based on the last player class,
I should be able to ask for all the
players that are in that player class.
So this should list all the rogues.
There's a bunch of rogues.
Now I can actually specify .count to
find out how many of them there are.
And that's actually doing a
select count star from in the
database behind the scenes.
I can...
What else can we do here?
We can ask for player first,
the player class, for instance,
to find out what player
class the first player is.
In that case, it was a mage.
So our associations are all set up,
and they seem to be working OK,
which is pretty good.
Oh, another thing I like about
TextMate is this feature.
I love that.
Makes my code nice and readable.
Now it's going to execute
more quickly as well.
I'm going to go on believing that.
All right.
So we've created our database,
and we've imported some
data in a very quickly,
in a fairly straightforward manner.
So the next thing we need to do
is actually create a controller.
So I'm going to generate a controller,
and I'm going to just
call this one player list,
just like so.
That goes away,
and it dumps all the files we need.
In particular,
it's created the player list controller,
which is that guy there.
So we're going to... Well,
let's just mock up the query that we're
going to write here on the console first,
before we do anything.
What I'd like to do is have kind of
like a table that says the player class,
the number of players in that class,
and then optionally allow
me to see those players.
So I'll have like multiple headings,
Mage, Warlock, Warrior, with the counts,
and then between those,
the actual players that are in them.
So what I can do here
is ask for player.count,
one of these aggregate functions.
I can say count all,
count all the players,
And then I can say group,
group them by player class.
If I run that, it's going to dump a
bunch of stuff in there.
Now, what exactly has this dumped?
Well, let's just look at the first
thing that it dumped here,
the first element.
It's actually dumped us a simple array.
The first object in the array is
a player class describing mage,
and the second object is the count, 14,
14 mages down there.
So, that's very convenient.
We haven't had to touch any SQL yet
or worry about anything like that.
It's all happening for
us behind the scenes.
And in Rails 2.1,
you can trust that a lot of these
queries have been very nicely optimized,
so we should be able to use this,
you know,
without ending up in a total meltdown.
So,
I'm going to go now into my controller.
My player list controller.
I'm going to start by
defining an index method.
We'll just call an index.
And I'm going to call this player
by class and then that same query.
Player count all group
by the player class.
This is what Joel was referring
to in domain-specific languages.
This almost reads like a
sentence that describes exactly
what you want to have happen.
It's almost not even jargon.
You could show that to a non-programmer
and they would probably be able
to figure out what is going on,
more or less, which is exciting.
If you're the kind of guy who
gets excited about those things,
which is me.
So I'm going to start a
new index view layer now.
Like, we need a template to
actually-- you know,
now that we've got the query result,
we need to present it.
So we're going to need to write, like,
a little bit of HTML.
So I'm going to write an index.html.erb,
just like that.
Here's my index.html.
Now I'm going to flagrantly
cheat and paste some code in.
simple code.
We'll go through briefly
what I'm doing here.
Obviously,
I'm saying this is the iGuild roster.
I'm iterating through
that players by class.
I'm actually calling sort.
And this is the most kind of
pearlish thing that I've done here,
which is I'm sorting and I'm sorting
by the second element in the array,
which is the count.
And I'm sorting in descending order.
So I could have probably
optimized that out,
but I sort of fell back onto my
sort of early Paul Pearl education
there and just wrote it all in line.
And once we've sorted all this out,
we're going to look at
player class and count.
So inside this block,
we're going to be presented
with those two objects.
I'm just presenting them here,
player class.name and the count.
And then down here,
I'm saying in a slightly
different way of iterating,
for player, in player class.players.
So for the given class, mage or whatever,
I'm pulling out all the players and
then I'm just printing their name,
their level and their rank.
And then I'm going to run the server,
the built-in web server,
which will come up.
In
I will start a new window
here and visit localhost:3000.
Play a list.
See what happens.
I've seen that before.
Oops.
What did we do wrong?
You know that bit where I said I was
flagrantly poking the demo gods?
They've been flagrantly poked.
It's a typo.
Come to WebKit.
No, not you.
Damn spaces.
Yeah, you all know my pain.
That's better.
So, you can applaud if you want.
That was a deliberate typo,
just to get a round of applause,
because it makes me feel great.
All right, so, you know, wow,
we've got this, you know,
simple list here, iGuild roster,
and everything worked out as we planned.
We've got the warlock,
we've got the number of warlocks,
and then we've got a
list of all the warlocks.
And so have we got hunters and
rogues and other things like that.
But this is kind of boring,
and we can wrap it up really quickly,
sort of demonstrating a little bit
of the power you get from working
with WebKit on our platform.
By doing some extra things here.
What extra things could we do?
Well, let's go into public style sheets.
Let's create a style sheet.
called demo.css.
I'm gonna grab my CSS code.
I've written about 60 lines of CSS here.
I'm not lying, there it is, 59 lines.
There's no extra magic
behind the scenes here.
Paste in that CSS,
all pretty standard stuff.
And then I am going to
grab some JavaScript.
Now, normally you wouldn't do this.
Normally you would put this in a
document load and sort of put it
off in its own JavaScript file.
But today I'm just going to
put it at the end of our file,
just so we can see everything
on the screen at once.
And basically what this
JavaScript is going to do is set
up an event handler such that
when you click one of the titles,
it toggles the unordered list element
underneath that and grows its height
from zero to some other value.
So it's toggling the value.
It might be zero pixels
or it might be 300 pixels.
And it would oscillate between those two,
depending on how many
elements are in there.
So I put in my JavaScript.
And you'll notice it's
all using prototypes.
So what I've got to do is say JIT to
get all of my JavaScript stuff.
And then I'm going to get a style sheet
as well that's cool TextMate stuff,
all these little macros.
So I've included the JavaScript.
I've included the style sheet.
I've got my seven or eight
lines of JavaScript in there
just to set up the handlers.
Let's see how it looks now.
Ooh, that looks better.
Yes, wow.
The cool thing is I've also used
animations and transformations here.
So when you click on one of these things,
you get this nice transformation.
Everything grows down there like that,
round the corners on the boxes,
very nice and easy,
only using a few lines of code.
And this isn't one of those hacky
kind of JavaScript animations.
This is all CSS-based animation.
The exact same stuff will
work on the iPhone as well.
So when you go to extend
this into the iPhone,
you're not going to be rewriting
a whole bunch of that code either.
So that is that, pretty much.
I think that's the end of our demo.
Yes, that's the end of our demo.
So we're going back to the slides,
and I'm handing back over to Joel,
who's going to take you through
asking questions about data.
Thank you very much.
Luke is a wizard on the demo machine.
And so you can see just how quickly
you can bring up a Rails application.
But for our project here
from our guild master,
we had a very particular
application in mind.
We wanted to be able
to build this quickly,
and we wanted it to be maintainable.
And so for that, we need to ask some
questions about our data.
So in this section,
I'm going to talk a little bit
about how Rails makes test-driven
development extremely easy,
and it helps guide your implementations.
And then I'm going to show some tools and
techniques for tightening up your code.
So the question that our
guild master wants to know is,
where's our stuff?
To answer this question as
quickly as possible while still
keeping the code maintainable,
we need a tool.
We need something to keep us on track,
keep us going in the right direction,
not waste any time.
One proven tool for this
is test-driven development.
So you might be familiar
with writing unit tests.
You have a suite of tests
that verify the behavior and
the correctness of your code.
But with test-driven development,
you write the test first,
you specify the way you
want your code to work,
and then in effect,
the test itself is the specification
for how your code should work.
This keeps the temptation away of writing
all those features that you think you
might need somewhere in the future,
but you don't actually.
You just write the code
to the specification.
This also gives you the ability
to refactor without fear.
If you have this raft of unit
tests and you change the underlying
implementation of some method,
you don't have to worry that
you're missing some edge cases and
you might be breaking something.
Well, you just run your unit tests,
see what breaks, fix it.
Ruby on Rails makes
this extremely simple.
You have no excuse, really,
not to be doing test-driven
development with Rails.
When you, I don't know if you noticed,
when Luke was generating all that code,
it was building the skeletons
for your unit tests right there.
So let's look back at our question here.
Where's our stuff?
We can rephrase this as,
how do items trend over all time?
So to do this with a
test-driven approach,
we need a story, right?
We need a simple story,
and we need to be able
to verify it in code.
So we know basically what we want
our end product to look like.
We want this time series graph.
But writing a test to verify
this data set would take possibly
thousands of lines for all the
thousands of data points there.
So this is not what we want.
We need something simpler.
So let's try this on for size.
We make up this story.
We start out with no elements.
On Monday, someone deposits five items.
And on Tuesday,
someone else withdraws two of them.
That's a simple enough story.
And we can now verify this
with just a few lines of code.
So first,
you have to define the data here.
When the model is created,
it gives you a file in test slash
fixtures called inventory logs dot yaml.
This is just,
yaml is just a simple format,
simple and human readable format
for specifying structured data.
So we name each of our transactions here,
deposit elixir and withdraw elixir.
And then for each line,
we'll write an attribute of this.
inventory log entry.
So, player Jane was defined
in when players.yaml,
and instead of having to
look up the player ID,
we can simply reference
the player by her name.
But really, for the purposes of this
test that we're writing now,
all we want to know is
that there are two entries,
two item entries in our inventory log.
And to make sure that it's
in chronological order,
we're going to test that the
balance on the first one is 100.
Okay,
so let's go over to our unit test file,
test units, inventory log test.rb.
And we're going to start
by adding a line here,
fixtures, inventory logs,
and that will load in the fixtures
file that we just defined.
and it will make it available
to all of our test cases.
So how do you write a test case?
You simply define a method
that starts with test_.
Now, the purpose of this is to say
how we want this code to work.
So we define a method
that we want to exist,
inventory log.items.
Going back to our example,
we know that the length of the item's
collection should be two and that the
balance on the first item should be 100.
So when we go ahead and run this
unit test from the command line,
We're going to get about
what we would expect.
We get a single E there,
which indicates that there was one test
and that it bailed out with an exception.
So what's the exception?
Simple enough, undefined method items.
Well, let's go and define that method.
So we go over to our model file,
@models.inventorylog.rb.
And we start by defining, okay,
what are going to be -- what are the
log entry types that refer to items,
deposit item and withdraw item?
Then this class less than less than self.
If you're not familiar
with Ruby very much,
this will just say that anything
inside of this block is a class method
instead of the normal instance method.
So in our items method here,
our items class method,
we're going to use the
ActiveRecordSupplied find method,
and we're going to find all entries
that match these conditions,
that the activity type is
deposit item or withdraw item,
and then we're going to order
them by activity timestamp.
So let's go back and run our test.
We get a little dot there,
which says that it passed
with flying colors.
And we have some functionality here.
So if we look back at
our simple story here,
if we were to present this
graph to our guild master,
he'll know how items trend over all time.
After that, he's going to want to know,
well, what happened on Tuesday?
There's that dip there.
Whose fault was that?
Once we have that,
we're going to want to answer
some questions about money.
We'll have similar
related questions to that,
such as how does money
trend over all time,
and again, what happened on Tuesday once
we have that picture there.
So let's break it down.
We've written the items method.
And we could answer the question
of what happened to the items
on Tuesday by giving it an
optional date range parameter.
Then we can write a money method that's
going to look very similar to our items.
And then to answer the question of
what happened to the money on Tuesday,
we could add another optional
date range parameter,
but at that point,
We are repeating this
date range parameter.
We're handling it the same way.
We're adding it to our find
options in the same way.
We're repeating ourselves.
This violates the DRY principle.
What is DRY?
Well, this is DRY.
Joy also means don't repeat yourself.
The reason you don't want to repeat
yourself is the more code you write,
the more mistakes you're likely to make.
And when you make those mistakes,
if you've repeated yourself,
you're going to have to fix
them in multiple places.
So we don't like this.
This gets old real fast.
So there's a few ways to solve this,
but in the middle of
writing our little demo app,
Rails 2.1 came out,
and it gives us this named scope
method that we can use in our models.
And named scopes,
you just define a scope,
and it acts a lot like a class method,
except that you can chain them
together in interesting ways.
So just to take a quick example here,
let's say you have some marbles.
You define a blue scope in your marbles,
and that'll return-- and marble.blue
will return all of your blue marbles.
You define a small scope here
so that marble.small will
return all your small marbles.
But then you can combine them together,
call marble.blue.small,
and with a single call
into your database,
it will give you all
the small blue marbles.
So let's apply this back
to our inventory log model.
Here's the code that we had,
a class method called items.
We rip that out and we replace it
with a named scope called items.
And we simply repeat
those same conditions and
ordering that we had before.
So breaking it down once again,
we have redefined this items method.
And we can define another
name scope called nRange that
will take our date range,
string them together like that,
and it'll answer the question of what
happened to the items on Tuesday.
We still have to write another
money scope that looks similar
to the items one we just wrote.
But then we can reuse the nRange scope,
combine it with money,
and that'll answer what happened
to the money on Tuesday.
All right,
so I'm just going to take a quick
look here at items.inrange and
write a test method for this case.
So we're going to test
items with date range.
We define our date range here as just
two strings separated by two dots,
and that'll create a
range object in Ruby.
And then we say we want to be able
to call inventory log.items.inrange
with that range element.
And we would expect from our
scenario that there would
be one item in that range.
So simple enough,
we define a name scope in range.
And since it takes a parameter,
we need to use this funny lambda thing.
A lambda function is
an anonymous function.
It's known in other
languages as a closure.
Really, it's just a block of code here,
and it accepts an argument range,
and we can then use that range
when we specify the conditions.
So we run our unit test
again from the command line.
It gives us two little dots this time,
and that will let us know that
we have our two test cases,
and they both passed with flying colors.
So that's just a little taste of the kind
of power that Rails gives you when you
need to do this structured development
and ask questions about your data.
It makes it easy to do test-driven
development to keep your implementations
going in the right direction,
and then there are tools such as
named scope that help you tighten
up your code and keep it dry.
So once we have those
questions formulated,
once we understand how
our models should work,
we need to present those answers.
So for that, we built our demo website.
Luke showed you this just to review.
We have this web page here.
There's a graph inside.
You click and drag.
It gives you a table of data below.
Then we also have the iPhone version,
which is showing the same data,
but it's just in a different format,
and it works slightly differently.
So we have this problem
where we have the same data.
We want to present it in different ways,
in different formats.
To solve this, Rails gives you, sorry,
we have, so I'm going to take a look at
three of these different formats.
You have, most obviously, the HTML.
This is the page container for
International Bank of iGuild.
We have something called JSON.
Now, that graph that you saw isn't an
image generated on the server side.
There's a JavaScript library
that makes a request from the
client side for structured data.
And this is, and it asks for a
JavaScript object notation.
And then it dynamically builds the graph.
And then, of course, we're going to look
at the iPhone version.
So the tool for managing
this is RespondTo.
It's a method and action controller,
and it lets you alter your response
based on the requested format.
You can think of it as kind of
a telephone switch operator.
And so to use respond to,
we set up a history controller to show
the item history and the gold history.
And if we define an item's action,
we'll just say what types of
formats that it should respond to.
So we're going to say that
we're responding to HTML,
JavaScript, and iPhone formats.
So first, the HTML.
This is the overall page.
We don't actually have any data on this
page because the data is requested after
the page load by the JavaScript library.
So we're going to say that
we're responding to HTML,
JavaScript, and iPhone formats.
So it's very simple here.
Each of these format.whateverformat
declarations can be followed
by an optional block of code,
but we don't need any of that.
All we do is declare format.html,
and if it matches that format,
it'll go out and fetch the
items.html.erb template and display that.
[Transcript missing]
Really all at once is a form
of serialization of your data.
So we're going to send
that back as serialization.
So it couldn't be easier to do
that in Rails because you don't
need to build any templates.
You don't need to have any kind
of library that spits out your
objects in this object notation.
You simply supply a block that says,
render JSON arrow,
and then the collection
of data that you have.
and it will implicitly
call .2 JSON on it.
Rails knows how to spit
out the JSON format for a
large number of data types.
Now, the iPhone.
We had to make this
iPhone version of this,
because what web app is
complete without one?
It turns out that we can use
the same content and the same
structure that we had it before,
and all we have to do
is define new behavior.
So we keep our HTML templates
the same with a few one-line
changes here and there.
We defined a new JavaScript file for
the behavior for all those fancy slides
and the back buttons and the like.
And then, of course,
a new CSS file to define the
new iPhone look stripped down.
So I'm not going to go
through all the code for this.
I'm just going to talk about,
in general terms,
how the JavaScript works.
We'll have the sample code available
afterward if you want to get
down into the nitty gritty here.
So from the front page,
when you click on one of these--
When you click on one
of these categories,
the JavaScript code is
going to intercept that.
It's going to talk to our controller.
It's going to receive some
bare-bones HTML back and then apply
the transition to get our new page.
So we have the same structure
here with new behavior,
but as far as the Ruby code is concerned,
it's, again, pretty simple.
For the iPhone format,
we give it a block,
and we just tell it to render our layout,
or render without any layout,
without any of the backgrounds,
the headers,
any of the Chrome on the page.
JavaScript handles everything for us,
displays it with a nice transition.
So this is just a little flavor
of the kind of problems we ran
into and how we were able to
present these answers in a nice,
pretty-looking website.
So we used the respondTo method,
which allows you to respond
with different formats to
requests for the same data.
We used object serialization
with extreme ease.
And we built an iPhone website where
we were able to keep the same structure
and define some new behavior for it.
So once we have the application built,
we need to have it face the world.
And for that,
I'm going to hand it back to Luke.
All right.
Did I mention before that my daughter was
born right in the middle of the keynote?
And do you know how hard it is to
actually keep doing that stuff while
tracking the keynote on your iPhone?
It's hard, because if you get it wrong,
you are going to be removing a
surgically implanted iPhone in
your head if you get found out.
Apparently,
we released a new phone or something.
So sooner or later your Rails application
is going to get popular.
And I wanted a picture here of like
a crowded train station or something,
but instead this is sort of the only
picture we had authorization to use.
So what I want you to imagine is,
imagine all of these people in this
photo crammed into a train carriage,
like really crammed in together,
and there's condensation coming down
the windows and everything because
everyone's sort of crammed in so tightly.
Then I want you to imagine
these people smeared with honey.
and Peanut Butter.
And then I want you to imagine somebody
releases a swarm of bees into that train.
And then another man opens up a briefcase
and it has a whole ant's nest in it.
And he kicks that briefcase
as hard as he can.
And then imagine that this train
with the bees and the honey and the
peanut butter is driving through
Yosemite at like four miles an hour,
say, at the start of spring.
I have just described to you
exactly what is going on in
Twitter's data center right now.
For this reason,
it's very important to get your
Rails deployment strategy right,
unless you want to be one
of these unfortunate people
crammed into the train.
I'd like you to deploy on
Mac OS X Server because we think it's
a really nice platform to deploy on.
We've got fantastic high-end hardware.
It's all silver.
And it looks great in your data center.
But it performs really well as well.
It's not just about the looks.
It's really good stuff.
I'm not going to go into
that too much detail.
I don't want you to feel like you're in a
sales and marketing sort of presentation.
But OS X Server is also structured
very similarly to client.
So when it comes time to work on the
command line and work with the system,
you're not in an alien environment.
You'll feel if you've
developed everything on client,
you're going to be at home on server.
And of course, you've got the server
admin tools as well,
which simplify a whole
range of operations,
so you can just dive into
the GUI and work there.
You don't need to do it
all in the command line.
So deployment.
What do we mean by deployment
for a Rails application?
Well, here's our server,
a Mac OS X server, naturally.
You've got Apache on there
answering all of the web requests.
You've got your Ruby on Rails application
living on there as well,
and a database,
and something in the middle.
Something has to be in the middle,
because Ruby on Rails doesn't
know about Apache,
and Apache doesn't know about
Ruby on Rails with something in
there to route these requests around.
What can you use to route
these requests around?
One option is Mongrel.
That's bundled on OS X.
It's basically a web server
that knows about Rails.
So it's not an application server per se,
but it's a web server that can be
started up inside a Rails application
and serve that Rails content out.
And as I said, it's built into Mac OS X,
built into Mac OS X Server.
It looks something like this.
You're going to have your
Apache layer or your web server,
and then underneath that,
mod proxy balancer,
which is essentially a way of taking
requests and evenly distributing
them using some algorithm over
multiple instances behind the scenes.
In this case,
you're going to have multiple mongrel
instances that are running individual
Ruby on Rails instances themselves and
a shared database underneath all that.
So you can structure your application
to run all these different,
as many mongrel instances
as you see necessary.
To start it up, it's really simple.
We've got this little command line,
useful little command line
called mongol-rails-persist.
What that does,
apart from allowing you to
set things like ports and what
environment you're starting in,
are you starting in
production or otherwise,
it also creates a launch DP list in
library launch daemons so that if your
server gets rebooted or a swarm of
bees attacks it or whatever happens,
it's going to come back
up again on startup.
And it's also Bonjour discoverable,
which is nice because when you get into
the configuration side on the GUI and
you're establishing one of these,
you know, sites from scratch,
you go into the proxy tab,
you enable reverse proxy,
and then you simply specify what balancer
URLs represent your mongrel instances
and requests can be routed to all these.
And when you go to add one of
these proxy sort of instances,
it already knows about the URL because
it discovers it over Bonjour.
So you can start up a whole bunch of
mongrels and they'll be visible in here
without you needing to remember anything,
which is kind of nice.
A new way to deploy that works really
well on our platform is Passenger,
and that is their logo there.
It looks like something that was
once spray-painted on my van when
I lived in a rough part of town,
but that's their logo.
It's available at modrails.com.
You can kind of think of it as
Mod Rails in the same way that
there is a mod.php and a mod.perl.
It's very new.
It's extremely easy to use.
It doesn't really encapsulate
how easy this is to use.
And it works great on OS X.
The developers are totally on
board with working with OS X,
and they've done a great job of
optimizing it on our platform.
So what does it look like?
You've got your Apache.
That's still there.
Underneath that, you have mod.passenger,
which is the Apache module itself.
Mod.passenger starts a
Rails framework instance,
an instance of the Rails framework.
So if it's Rails 2.1,
there'll be one 2.1 framework instance.
So unlike the Mongrel case,
you're not going to be instantiating
multiple instances of framework.
You'll just have one.
Underneath that,
you have an application spawner,
which takes care of starting multiple
Rails application instances as needed.
So you can start 10 Rails instances
if you think you're going to need 10
different instances of it running.
Installing passenger,
because it doesn't come
default on our platform yet,
is simply a matter of saying
sudo gem install passenger.
and I are working on a new Apache module
called Pseudo Passenger Install Apache 2,
which sets you up so it's
a valid Apache module.
You create a virtual host,
the document root of which
points to the public directory
of your Rails application.
And then there's nothing else to do.
That's all you need to do
to deploy the application.
So once you've done those initial two
steps of getting Passenger installed,
All you need to do from
that point forward,
anytime you want to deploy
a new Rails application,
is just create a virtual host and
point it to the right location.
And it starts up the Rails instance
and it handles everything for you.
It's really cool.
Another thing you're going to
think about with deployment,
especially if you are an iron-fisted
guildmaster and you want to keep
track of everything that's going
on in your World of Warcraft guild,
you're going to need to pull
data on a regular basis.
So when you're doing something
like that on Mac OS X Server,
we recommend that you use
LaunchD rather than anything like
Cron or setting up your own process
that sort of persists and lives on.
I like to use Lingon because
I can't remember the XML syntax
for creating LaunchDP lists,
and if you can remember that,
then you're doing much better than I am.
Just grab Lingon,
set up a LaunchD process.
Just remember that you have to
set the Rails env variable to
specify what environment your
application is starting in,
whether it's production or
whether it's development.
So in conclusion, what have we learned?
I think you can say that building
Rails apps are very easy.
We built one live on stage
here with hardly any effort,
and we built that more sophisticated
website with actually a lot more effort.
But it wasn't really that bad.
Test-driven development is very easy.
As I flagrantly demonstrated,
I did not use test-driven development
and was punished for it by the demo gods.
But you really have no excuse not to use
test-driven development on Ruby on Rails,
because all the infrastructure
is there for you.
It's presented on a plate.
You shouldn't ignore it.
Rails loves the iPhone.
The iPhone probably loves Rails.
It's really easy to write an iPhone
version of your website or create a
dedicated website just for the iPhone.
We think Rails is best
enjoyed on Mac OS X.
As Joel pointed out,
it was developed on Mac OS X.
If you look at a screencast of Ruby on
Rails anywhere on the Internet,
chances are you'll be looking
at TextMate on Mac OS X.
It's very popular on our platform,
and you'll get a lot of support there.
And I think Rails is best
deployed on Mac OS X Server,
but I may be sort of
biased in that belief,
working for Apple and all that.
But we make it really easy,
and hopefully in the future,
especially as Snow Leopard rolls along,
we hope to have even more easy ways
to deploy your Rails applications.
We want to make it as easy as possible.
We have some documentation
for you to check out here.
Recommend the Rails book
from Pragmatic Programmers.
We've got a website,
maybe you've heard of it,
called apple.com.
You can go there and see a whole
bunch of Rails resources as well.
There's this really great PDF,
which has a difficult-to-remember URL,
but somebody has put together all of the
Rails 2.1 changes in a really nice PDF,
and if you just search for Rails 2.1 PDF,
you'll probably be
taken to the same site.
HBricade, if you want to find out more
information about that and some
of the other wacky projects that
Why the Lucky Stiff is involved in.
I have no idea.
He's some sort of superhuman being,
but he churns out a lot
of interesting stuff,
so please do visit his website.
And if you'd like any more
information about the questions today,
or the demonstration today,
if you'd like sample code,
please don't hesitate to give
myself or Joel a quick email,
and we'd be happy to hook you up
with some sample code or answer
any questions that you have.